It is August 1st. This is the third interview with
General Hanover.
This
is the last or the third and probably last
interview with General Hanover. Today is August
1st, 1980. Today let's talk about the military and
leadership and the changes that have taken place
at Texas A&M. All right. How does one get ahead in
the military? Is it different from professional
life in business or in academics? Are there
similarities? Terry, I really don't think there
are any differences. Basically, leadership is
leadership wherever you are, in my opinion. And I
think they all come about by a person striving to
excel and making those that you're leading feel
like they can be led properly and setting an
example of the way you expect people to work or to
follow, whichever it may be, whether it's
military, civilian, or whatever. OK. Now, when
you think back on your military career and
advancement Did you leave advancement to all,
let's say, fate, the decisions of others, or did
you think that your advancement was because of
your actions? Well, it's bound to be a little of
both. I think the basic part of it is a person
himself as to how he progresses, how his...
feelings toward whether he wants to advance,
there are some people who do not want to advance.
There are some people who do not want to be leaders.
They want to be led. And so it's a great percent of
what a person puts himself in as to his own
feelings, his own actions, but there is always
that part of it that the positions become
available because many times two people could be
almost exact leader, have leadership qualities,
and one may have opportunities where the other
does never get them. So the majority of it, I would
say, is a person himself, his actions, his
reactions, but there must be openings for
climbing up the ladder. Yeah, yeah. Very few men
obtain the success that you've had. Very few
become generals or become directors in charge of a
highway district. Do you feel that during your
career you would consider yourself ambitious?
Yes, I was ambitious. I wanted to, I wanted to move
up. I wanted to Get in a position of
responsibility. I like responsibility. I like to
lead. Of course, I think a good leader at some point
likes to be led. You must be led early in the game. Of
course, a person never gets to the place where he's
not led by someone. Unless it's like Truman said,
the buck stops here. There's one or two places in
the world that the buck stops. But even in my two
positions of leadership, there were those above
me who, you must say, were leading me or giving me
the opportunity to follow. And even though the
president, of course, there, at least in a
democracy, seemed to be led quite a bit by popular
opinion. Theoretically. Theoretically. I think
that was a clever saying. And to a degree, it's
correct. Now, of course, retirement is a
substantial change in an individual's life. Why
did you retire from the military? Well, I had
forced military retirement because under the
rules and regulations, certain ranks have
certain areas
you can move up through, but there are points to
where At a certain time, if you have not moved
further or if you do not move out of a position, then
you will have mandatory retirement. Now, there
are not too many brigadier generals. There are
less major generals. So there are some people who
got to be major generals who were in a little more
favorable position than I. I never had that
opportunity. I think I would have liked to have had
it if I had that opportunity, but I have no regrets
as to the position that I got to. I don't feel like
that, you know, the gate was shut to me and that I
have a resentment that I didn't get to be a major
general because that would have taken more time on
my part, more effort, and I thought I was very
successful as I was and I felt a great sense of
accomplishment. So it was really mandatory as far
as the Was there a rule, were you alluding to the day
before yesterday, a rule that after you were in a
grade for five years, then it was mandatory
retirement? In the grade of Brigadier General, at
the time that I reached that position, you could
either stay five years in grade are 30 years of
service, whichever came later. And the five years
in grade came later for me because I had 31 and a half
years of total service. So there is a stopping
point. You're not allowed to just stay and stay
when you reach either so much in grade or so many
years in service. Now, do you remember your
thoughts on the day that you retired? Can you tell
me about that? Very well. I had no animosity at all
to the service for putting me out. I was highly
pleased that I had accomplished the thing that I
had. I had been working very hard over the last two
to three years that I was in command. I spent a great
deal of weekends, a great deal of nights, And this
had deprived me of a lot of time with my family. It
was part of the job. And taking the job, I did that.
But I think I felt that I had reached a point that I
could take a deep breath and say, you know, I'm
going to have some time of my own. So I really felt
like I had sort of reached
pinnacle that I was looking for I had gotten to the
top of the mountain I could see on the other side and
I was ready to go back down if that makes any sense
and it's a great deal of sense
and another thing that gave me satisfaction I knew
who was going to take my place or at least I was
pretty certain and I felt like that The command
structure was in good hands, and it would, as I told
someone, each time you get a new leader, you get new
ideas, you get new motives, you get new thoughts,
and I can't help but to believe that a change of
command many times enhances an organization.
I didn't feel like I had all the answers, in other
words. A new man had new answers, A lot of times a new
room is sweet to clean,
you know. Plus you had your civilian crew to look
forward to. That's correct. And how many more
years did you have to look forward in the highway
department? Well, actually, I had, at that time, I
had about, let's see,
well, I must have had about four or five more prior
to mandatory retirement. But I was not
anticipating going to mandatory retirement. At
that time, you had to retire at the highway
department at 65. And I guess in 71, I was, well, I
guess I was 57. So I'd have had eight years that I
could have worked. But I didn't plan to work all
that length of time. How long did you want to work? I
had the plan to work till about 60, which would have
been five years ahead of mandatory. And the reason
for that was, well, really two things. One, I
wanted to retire early as soon as I felt like I
financially could do so. And as you know, you draw a
reservist or a reserve army people draw their
retirement at 60. And I had sort of planned that
that would be a point that I could afford to retire.
That plus my highway pay would enable me to retire
and live comfortably. And so you did retire at age
60? Well, just prior to. In fact, I was going to
retire at 60, but the retirement of the highway
department comes under the state legislature,
and they made a few last-minute changes which made
it economically feasible or economically
advantageous to me to retire in August prior to the
following February, which I planned to retire. So
I retired, well, August ahead of my 60th birthday
in February. Are you happy that you retired?
Absolutely. I have never regretted retirement,
not one minute. In fact, my first day of retirement
was three years ago today. I retired on July 31st.
So three years ago today, I was a retired person
from the military and the highway department. And
it was a great day, and I've had three years of great
time since. Now, that would not be possible for a
person like me unless you have outside injuries.
Absolutely. And I had many outside interests and I
was looking forward to getting into those. I had
not had time to do that during the years that I was
active in the Reserve and Highway Department and I
have just really had a ball. Been delightful.
Let's talk about leadership. You started to
define leadership just a few minutes ago. Could
you define it for me? Well, other than those things
that I said, the ability to lead, the ability to
understand being led, the ability to decide
courses of action that are both advantageous for
you and your organization and those that are being
led, your ability to see, I think, an end through
the possible problems that may arise and I think
also the ability to to analyze problems as they do
crop up and to be able to accomplish a mission set
out with with the and I always think with the good
feeling of those that are being led there are
leaders in my opinion, who lead by sheer force and
by sheer determination, regardless of how it
affects those who are led. And there are
successful people at that. And I really think one
of my best definitions of one of those was Patton.
Patton, without question, was a leader. an
absolute leader, but he led behind the feeling of
those that were being led. And that is not my
philosophy. And I don't mean by that that you can
lead and keep your lead happy all the time. But I
think that the feelings, I think the concern and
welfare of those that are being led is part of the
marks of a leader. You can't argue with success,
but I am a different type leader than Patton was. Of
course, he was in a much, much more important
position than I, but my philosophies are
different than his. Now, sometimes when you talk
about, or I've heard in the past when people talk
about, they talk about military leaders, and then
they talk about political leaders, and they talk
about other types of civilian leaders. Do you
think there is a difference between the military
type leader, maybe you were alluding to it a minute
ago, and when you talked about Patton, Patton's
sort of a kick-em-in-the-you-know-where, an
over-the-hill-boys type leader, and sometimes
civilians get the idea that that's what military
leadership is. What do you think about that? No, I
think a lot of qualities of leadership depend on
the individual. I think my qualities of
leadership and yours could be entirely
different, and they could both be highly
successful.
And here again, comparing, I could not attempt to
lead like Patton did, and he probably couldn't
have been successful as I led.
He's just got a different philosophy. But each
end, of course, a lot of qualities of leadership
everybody's got. I think there's a lot of it that is
common to everybody. But the specifics of
leadership depend a great deal on the individual
and his ability to interpret and to impart to the
subordinates and react to the superiors are
entirely different. What about personal values
in leadership? I mean, do you think that an
individual has to have certain values? I sure do.
Like, for example? Well, I think you've got to be
honest. I think you've got to be straightforward.
I think you've got to be open. I think you've got to
have an appreciation of those that are being led
there are a lot of values and I guess here again
those could differ with the leader but in my
opinion those four or five are very important and
I'm sure there are a great many others do you feel
that you have those values well I was aware of them
all the time and and attempted that it was my intent
to have those things and I worked at it I If I didn't
fulfill those, it was accidentally not
intentional because I think they're very
important.
I think one that I have always felt like was real
important was recognition of jobs well done.
After it is done, I think you've got to begin with
You've got to begin by telling people what you
expect, being explicit and having two-way
communication. But then after the job is done,
whether it's done right or wrong, some type of
recognition. Hopefully, a pat on the back. I think
anybody who looks to somebody for leadership
wants to know if they don't do it right. And I think
that's important. I think there's a proper way to
tell them it's right or it's wrong. Those are my
thinking about that sort of thing. This is sort of a
similar question.
But nevertheless, I think it's important. You
said that you had intent to become a good leader.
Let's say you were talking to a group of corpsmen
today over at A&M, and the topic was, how to become a
leader. Are these some of the things that you'd
say, and are there others? Yes.
I think for a man to be a leader, he has to want to be a
leader.
People that, and I say people, because we're
mainly talking about leading people, I think, but
people that are led want to know that their leader
does want to be a leader it's i i have been in
situations where i was being led by people who
either didn't have an interest in what they were
doing or they really didn't care about being
leaders and it's very evident to me yeah and i want
to be led by someone who has my interest who has his
interest who's got a goal and who wants to be a
leader, I look to people that are not interested in
what they're doing and are not really concerned
about success. And really, it's not going to
succeed a great much of the time. And I think a good
leader has to be an optimist. That's another one. I
think a good leader has got to be an optimist.
Because I'd rather be an optimist and be wrong than
a pessimist and be right. So I think optimism plays
a great part. That's another value, probably.
That's right. What about tolerance? You've got to
be tolerant. You've got to be tolerant. Because
everybody's not going to do exactly like you want
them to do. And if you can show people here again,
I'm talking I'm speaking of my own thoughts. My
own, yeah. Patton certainly probably wasn't
tolerant. That's right.
But it worked for him in some manner. It almost
caused his downfall in others. But if you're
tolerant with people, then they're not going to be
afraid to act. If a person is afraid to make a
mistake, then he's not going to do much because
everybody feels that he has the possibility of
making a mistake. And if he makes a mistake and he
knows that he's going to just catch hell from every
side, then he's reluctant to do a whole lot. And of
course, those that worked for Patton for years, I
guess, came to recognize that as part of working
for him. But I'd say he did not have tolerance, and
tolerance, in my opinion, is a quality of
leadership. Nor did he have flexibility. That's
right. And you think that in your idea of
leadership, is flexibility important? It plays a
part. It sure does.
You're a rigid person, a person who says, my idea is
the only one. You're you're just heading for some
disaster, in my opinion.
Another quality of leadership, I think, and I
think I had this, or at least I attempted to, and
that is to be receptive to the idea of others.
There's no one person who's got all the answers.
And I continually sought
and was demanding that other people give me their
ideas for whatever the problem was, whatever the
decision I was making, I used my staff to a great
degree, I think. I certainly intended to, and I
believe I was successful in that. There are
suggestions? Yes, yes. Input from... staff,
assistants, subordinates. What about mustard
men? I've gotten some some from them too you know
that's uh gosh they've they've got more ideas than
you ever saw some of them are far-fetched but pitch
it out the window but evaluate it right if you don't
need it. A man to me was not too low on the pole to have
a good idea. I've had some Tremendous suggestions
from, I'll use the word, raw recruits, you know,
people who just moved in with the picture.
I really never ridiculed any suggestions. I like
to take them and spin them around and bring it out
and see if it's any good. Another thing I think a
leader has got to have and that is the ability to
finally make up his mind and act and not to
continually wonder if you made a good decision. A
decision has to be made and acted upon and then that
is down the river.
Go to the next problem because there's not
anything you can do about that one And here again,
I've seen people who could make a decision, but
then they'd just continue to worry about whether
it was a good decision. And I think that's time and
effort lost. You just mentioned your staff. Can
you tell me about the quality of the staff that you
were commanding?
Well, I selected most of them. I ought to have
thought they were pretty good. But you had a large
pool of quality then to select from. That's right.
I don't mean they all were top notch. Here again,
everybody has their own limitations. But I have
had both civilian and military some very fine
assistance. And I've always be the first to say
that those who were helping me had a great deal to do
with the success that I had. I don't by any means
feel that I attained the rank in the military or the
position in the highway department by myself. I
had a lot of help, and there were probably many
others who were just as qualified as I, and I got
some breaks. Maybe they didn't. But it wasn't done
by myself, my whole life. As we've already
established, your ideas of leadership are much
different than General Patton's. I know that this
is an impossible question to answer, really, but
I'd just like your thoughts on this. Do you think
that in the military, more people have the idea of
leadership that you have or General Patton?
Well, that is a hard question.
I don't know of very many
leaders who reached the level, say, that Patton
did that had the leadership qualities that he had.
I think he was sort of one out of many.
I don't believe across the board that very many
people could be as successful as Patton was with
his qualities of leadership. I believe there have
been more successful leaders with more of my style
or the style that I like to feel I fall in than his
style. I think he's I think he's on the extreme far
side of the middle of the road type leaders, in my
opinion. So if I had to make a guess, I'd say Moore
followed my style and followed his style. Would
you say that your style runs closer to someone,
let's say, like General Eisenhower? Well, I don't
know that I can put myself in his style, but he He was
more of a soldier's leader than was Patton. And I
liked to feel like I was a soldier's leader or a
civilian leader, whatever. So my style was, I'd
say, a whole lot more like him than it was like
Patton. Another question. You were a leader in
war? on a smaller scale during the Second World
War, and you're also a leader on a larger scale
during peacetime. Is it more difficult to be a
leader during war or during peace in the military?
Well, more difficult, I'm not sure I know what you
mean. There are more difficulties arising in war,
of course, but I really don't think that there's
any difference and leadership no matter the
situation. Now, there are hardships and there are
turmoils and there are disasters that happen
during wartime or emergency times that may take
more far-reaching decisions or decisions that
affect a lot more people. But I really don't
believe that there's really any difference in
good leadership, whatever the situation. What
about the idea of cause? The men having a cause.
World War II was a time when the country was united,
perhaps like no time before in American history.
We have a cause. Do you think that has any impact on
helping a leader become a great leader, or helping
an individual become a leader? Oh, it's bound to.
If
soldiers are motivated by common cause, so to
speak, there's no question that it makes
leadership easier. But still, the basics of
leadership are there regardless. If people are
unmotivated or if the morale is low from other
standpoints, then it just adds some more
responsibilities to leadership that I think a
good leader has. And it just tries them out a little
bit harder. But it's a good point. They were
motivated. regardless of who the leader was. But
really, war or otherwise, I don't really look at it
as any more difficult one way or the other. I think
responsibilities and problems of leadership are
there, whatever the situation.
Of course, leadership is an important question
politically today, because it seems like ever
since 1968,
when President Johnson said he was no longer going
to run for re-election, and then we had Watergate,
it seems like we've had a leadership crisis, at
least the journalists seem to say that we've had
this leadership crisis in America. How could we
resolve this?